
1. Zootaxa. 2019 Dec 19;4712(2):zootaxa.4712.2.3. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4712.2.3.

Systematics of the Ameerega rubriventris complex (Anura: Dendrobatidae)
with descriptions of two new cryptic species from the East-Andean versant of
Peru.

Brown JL(1), Siu-Ting K, VON May R, Twomey E, Guillory WX, Deutsch MS, Chávez G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University, 1125 Lincoln Drive,
Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.. jasonleebrown@gmail.com.

We describe two new species of poison frog from central and southern Peru that
have been referred to as Ameerega picta, A. hahneli, or A. altamazonica
throughout the past thirty years. Our phylogenies generated with genomic data
provide strong support that the two new species are successive sisters to two
described taxa, A. rubriventris and A. altamazonica, and collectively comprise
the Ameerega rubriventris complex. The first new taxon, Ameerega panguana sp.
nov., can be distinguished from all other Ameerega by its combination of a unique
white venter and an advertisement call of 1-2 notes per second. The second new
taxon, Ameerega imasmari sp. nov., is the only cryptically colored Ameerega
species that is disttributed across the Fitzcarrald Arch in Southern Peru which
possesses a 'peep' advertisement call consisting of 3-4 notes per second and a
dominant frequency of 4.3-4.5 kHz. Within the Ameerega rubriventris complex, we
observed differences between species in their ventral coloration, tympanum
diameter, and call, which suggest that these taxa are reproductively isolated
from each other.

DOI: 10.11646/zootaxa.4712.2.3 
PMID: 32230685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Zootaxa. 2019 Aug 27;4661(1):zootaxa.4661.1.12. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4661.1.12.

The tadpole of Ameerega boehmei in southeastern Bolivia.

French CM(1), Burkette C, Reichle S, Brown JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University, 1125 Lincoln Drive,
Carbondale, IL, USA, 62901 Current Address: Biology Department, The Graduate
Center, City University of New York, 365 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY, USA, 10016. 
user@example.com.

To date, half (16 of 32) of the species of Ameerega have had their tadpoles
described: A. altamazonica, A. bassleri, A. bilinguis, A. braccata, A.
cainarachi, A. flavopicta, A. hahneli, A. macero, A. parvula, A. petersi, A.
picta, A. rubriventris, A shihuemoy. A. silverstonei, A. smaragdina, and A.
trivittata (Lescure, 1976; Silverstone, 1976; Duellman, 1978; Myers Daly, 1979;
Rodriguez Myers, 1993; Haddad Martins, 1994; Lötters et al., 1997; Duellman,
2005; Costa et al., 2006; Twomey Brown, 2008; Brown Twomey, 2009; Poelman et al.,
2010; Schulze et al., 2015). Ameerega boehmei is a putative member of a clade
containing Ameerega braccata, A. flavopicta, A. berohoka, A. munduruku, all of
which inhabit various parts of the 'dry diagonal' between the Amazon and Atlantic
rainforests (Prado Gibbs, 1993). Adult frogs in this group are morphologically
similar, generally dark-bodied with yellow dorsolateral stripes, orange flash
marks and some also possessing bright-yellow dorsal spots. Despite considerable
research on their breeding behavior, acoustics and systematics (Lötters et al.,
2009; Forti et al., 2013), the tadpole of Ameerega boehmei, the southern-most and
western-most distributed species in this tentative group, has not been described.

DOI: 10.11646/zootaxa.4661.1.12 
PMID: 31716726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2020 Jan;142:106638. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2019.106638. Epub 
2019 Oct 3.

Phylogenetic relationships and systematics of the Amazonian poison frog genus
Ameerega using ultraconserved genomic elements.

Guillory WX(1), French CM(2), Twomey EM(3), Chávez G(4), Prates I(5), von May
R(6), De la Riva I(7), Lötters S(8), Reichle S(9), Serrano-Rojas SJ(10),
Whitworth A(11), Brown JL(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University, 1125 Lincoln Drive,
Carbondale, IL 62901, USA. Electronic address: wilson.guillory@siu.edu.
(2)Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University, 1125 Lincoln Drive,
Carbondale, IL 62901, USA; Department of Biology, Graduate Center, City
University of New York, 365 5th Ave, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(3)Pontificia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre,
Brazil.
(4)División de Herpetología, Centro de Ornitología y Biodiversidad (CORBIDI),
Santa Rita N°105 36 Of. 202, Urb. Huertos de San Antonio, Santiago de Surco,
Lima, Peru.
(5)Department of Vertebrate Zoology, National Museum of Natural History,
Smithsonian Institution, 10th and Constitution Ave, NW, Washington, DC
20560-0162, USA.
(6)Biology Program, California State University Channel Islands, 1 University
Drive, Camarillo, CA 93012, USA.
(7)Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales (MNCN), Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), 28006 Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Biogeography, Universität Trier, Universitätsring 15, 54296,
Trier, Germany.
(9)Museo de Charupas, Santiago de Chiquitos, Bolivia.
(10)Universidad Nacional de San Antonio Abad del Cusco, Cusco, Peru; Institute of
Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(11)Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, College of
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United
Kingdom.
(12)Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University, 1125 Lincoln Drive,
Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.

The Amazonian poison frog genus Ameerega is one of the largest yet most
understudied of the brightly colored genera in the anuran family Dendrobatidae,
with 30 described species ranging throughout tropical South America. Phylogenetic
analyses of Ameerega are highly discordant, lacking consistency due to variation 
in data types and methods, and often with limited coverage of species diversity
in the genus. Here, we present a comprehensive phylogenomic reconstruction of
Ameerega, utilizing state-of-the-art sequence capture techniques and phylogenetic
methods. We sequenced thousands of ultraconserved elements from over 100 tissue
samples, representing almost every described Ameerega species, as well as
undescribed cryptic diversity. We generated topologies using maximum likelihood
and coalescent methods and compared the use of maximum likelihood and Bayesian
methods for estimating divergence times. Our phylogenetic inference diverged
strongly from those of previous studies, and we recommend steps to bring Ameerega
taxonomy in line with the new phylogeny. We place several species in a phylogeny 
for the first time, as well as provide evidence for six potential candidate
species. We estimate that Ameerega experienced a rapid radiation approximately
7-11 million years ago and that the ancestor of all Ameerega was likely an
aposematic, montane species. This study underscores the utility of phylogenomic
data in improving our understanding of the phylogeny of understudied clades and
making novel inferences about their evolution.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ympev.2019.106638 
PMID: 31586688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2019 Sep;138:31-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2019.05.021. Epub
2019 May 22.

Speciation with introgression: Phylogeography and systematics of the Ameerega
petersi group (Dendrobatidae).

French CM(1), Deutsch MS(2), Chávez G(3), Almora CE(3), Brown JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University, 1125 Lincoln Drive,
Carbondale, IL 62901, USA. Electronic address: cfrench@gradcenter.cuny.edu.
(2)Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University, 1125 Lincoln Drive,
Carbondale, IL 62901, USA. Electronic address: michael.deutsch@siu.edu.
(3)División de Herpetología, Centro de Ornitología y Biodiversidad (CORBIDI),
Santa Rita N°105 36 Of. 202, Urb. Huertos de San Antonio, Santiago de Surco,
Lima, Peru.
(4)Department of Zoology, Southern Illinois University, 1125 Lincoln Drive,
Carbondale, IL 62901, USA. Electronic address: jason.brown@siu.edu.

The Tropical Andes contains exceptionally high diversity, much of it arising
within the Quaternary period. The complex geology of the Andes and paleoclimate
fluctuations within the Quaternary suggest complex speciation scenarios. This, in
turn, has contributed to idiosyncratic speciation modes among shallowly diverged 
Amazonian taxa. Many relationships among these taxa remain poorly resolved. Here 
we use a sequence capture approach, ultraconserved elements (UCEs), to address
the phylogenetic relationships among three recently diverged Peruvian Ameerega
poison frog species (A. cainarachi, A. petersi, and A. smaragdina; family
Dendrobatidae) and explore a possible mode of speciation in this group. We assess
concordance among concatenated phylogenetic tree inference, gene-tree based
species tree inference, SNP-based species tree inference, and Bayes factor
lineage delimitation to resolve species boundaries. We complement these analyses 
with assessments of call divergence to address the presence of a prezygotic
reproductive barrier. Additionally, we further explore the phylogeographic
history of these species of Ameerega with demographic inference, considering
evidence for admixture and population expansions. Our results support the
synonymy of A. smaragdina as a junior synonym of A. petersi and we find that
speciation in this group is characterized by admixture and signatures of a
population bottleneck followed by expansion. We invoke the disturbance-vicariance
hypothesis to explain the observed patterns and call for more, detailed
investigations of in-situ speciation in the Tropical Andes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ympev.2019.05.021 
PMID: 31125660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Zookeys. 2018 May 31;(762):131-148. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.762.22634. eCollection
2018.

Anuran species composition of Cancão Municipal Natural Park, Municipality of
Serra do Navio, Amapá state, Brazil.

Silva E Silva YB(1), Costa-Campos CE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Amapá, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde,
Laboratorio de Herpetologia, Rod. Juscelino Kubitschek, km 02, Jardim Marco Zero,
CEP 68.903-419, Macapá, AP, Brasil.

In this study, the first survey of anuran species in the Cancão Municipal Natural
Park is presented, a protected area of approximately 370 hectares of Amazonian
forest located in the northwest center region of the state of Amapá, Brazil. The 
work was performed during the dry and rainy season, through active visual and
auditory survey, totaling 216 man hours of sampling effort. Forty-nine species of
anuran amphibians were recorded in the Cancão Municipal Natural Park, including
three new records: Hyalinobatrachium iaspidiense, Pristimantis cf. ockendeni, and
Scinax garbei. Three species, Hyalinobatrachium iaspidiense, Ameerega
pulchripecta, and Anomaloglossus baeobatrachus, are listed as Data Deficient and 
one is listed as Vulnerable (Atelopus hoogmoedi) according red lists of IUCN. The
rarefaction curve cumulative species did not reach an asymptote, indicating that 
site has potential for species that have not yet been recorded. Nine species were
represented by only one individual and were considered rare in the studied
environments, eight species were defined as common, and the 32 remaining species 
were classified as having intermediary abundance. Our data indicated that Cancão 
Municipal Natural Park contains a considerable portion of the anurans species
richness of Amapá state, turn the area into a place of great importance for the
conservation of the anurans of the Eastern Amazon.

DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.762.22634 
PMCID: PMC5992246
PMID: 29910662 


6. Evolution. 2018 Apr;72(4):1009-1014. doi: 10.1111/evo.13468. Epub 2018 Mar 25.

Comment on Amézquita et al. (2017) "Conspicuousness, color resemblance, and
toxicity in geographically diverging mimicry: The pan-Amazonian frog Allobates
femoralis".

Saporito RA(1), Grant T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, John Carroll University, University Heights, Ohio
44118.
(2)Department de Zoology, Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo,
05508, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Comment on
    Evolution. 2017 Apr;71(4):1039-1050.

Amézquita et al. (2017) recently concluded that species of the Allobates
femoralis group are toxic to mice at levels equivalent to syntopic
alkaloid-containing poison frogs, which they attributed to the presence of
alkaloids in skin secretions. However, the chemical composition of skin
secretions was not analyzed, and here we present additional data supporting the
absence of alkaloids in skin secretions of the Allobates femoralis group.
Instead, we suggest the observed toxicity was caused by the anesthetic
benzocaine, which was applied to the buccal cavity to euthanize frogs prior to
skin removal. We show that orally administered benzocaine is rapidly incorporated
into the skin of species that sequester and do not sequester alkaloids, which
casts doubt on the conclusion that Allobates femoralis group skin secretions are 
toxic and makes the results of experiments with alkaloid-containing species of
Adelphobates and Ameerega uninterpretable. To prevent experimental errors and
misinterpretations in studies of amphibian chemical defense, we encourage
researchers to test the chemical composition of samples prior to experimentation,
include all necessary controls to detect false positives, conduct small pilot
studies for new methods, and consider the limitations of particular methods and
their ability to address the intended research questions.

© 2018 The Author(s). Evolution © 2018 The Society for the Study of Evolution.

DOI: 10.1111/evo.13468 
PMID: 29524217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mech Dev. 2018 Dec;154:2-11. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2017.12.002. Epub 2018 Jan 3.

The extraordinary biology and development of marsupial frogs (Hemiphractidae) in 
comparison with fish, mammals, birds, amphibians and other animals.

Del Pino EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Escuela de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador,
Quito 170517, Ecuador. Electronic address: edelpino@puce.edu.ec.

The study of oogenesis and early development of frogs belonging to the family
Hemiphractidae provide important comparison to the aquatic development of other
frogs, such as Xenopus laevis, because reproduction on land characterizes the
Hemiphractidae. In this review, the multinucleated oogenesis of the marsupial
frog Flectonotus pygmaeus (Hemiphractidae) is analyzed and interpreted. In
addition, the adaptations associated with the incubation of embryos in the pouch 
of the female marsupial frog Gastrotheca riobambae (Hemiphractidae) and the
embryonic development of this frog are summarized. Moreover, G. riobambae
gastrulation is compared with the gastrulation modes of Engystomops randi and
Engystomops coloradorum (Leptodactylidae); Ceratophrys stolzmanni
(Ceratophryidae); Hyalinobatrachium fleischmanni and Espadarana callistomma
(Centrolenidae); Ameerega bilinguis, Dendrobates auratus, Epipedobates anthonyi, 
Epipedobates machalilla, Epipedobates tricolor, and Hyloxalus vertebralis
(Dendrobatidae); Eleutherodactylus coqui (Terrarana: Eleutherodactylidae), and X.
laevis (Pipidae). The comparison indicated two modes of frog gastrulation. In X. 
laevis and in frogs with aquatic reproduction, convergent extension begins during
gastrulation. In contrast, convergent extension occurs in the post-gastrula of
frogs with terrestrial reproduction. These two modes of gastrulation resemble the
transitions toward meroblastic cleavage found in ray-finned fishes
(Actinopterygii). In spite of this difference, the genes that guide early
development seem to be highly conserved in frogs. I conclude that the shift of
convergent extension to the post-gastrula accompanied the diversification of frog
egg size and terrestrial reproductive modes.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mod.2017.12.002 
PMID: 29305906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Exp Biol. 2018 Jan 29;221(Pt 2). pii: jeb169714. doi: 10.1242/jeb.169714.

Map-like navigation from distances exceeding routine movements in the
three-striped poison frog (Ameerega trivittata).

Pašukonis A(1), Loretto MC(2), Hödl W(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Vienna, Department of Cognitive Biology, Althanstrasse 14,
Vienna 1090, Austria andrius.pasukonis@univie.ac.at.
(2)University of Vienna, Department of Cognitive Biology, Althanstrasse 14,
Vienna 1090, Austria.
(3)University of Vienna, Department of Integrative Zoology, Althanstrasse 14,
Vienna 1090, Austria.

Most animals move in dense habitats where distant landmarks are limited, but how 
they find their way around remains poorly understood. Poison frogs inhabit the
rainforest understory, where they shuttle tadpoles from small territories to
widespread pools. Recent studies revealed their excellent spatial memory and the 
ability to home back from several hundred meters. It remains unclear whether this
homing ability is restricted to the areas that had been previously explored or
whether it allows the frogs to navigate from areas outside their direct
experience. Here, we used radio-tracking to study the navigational performance of
three-striped poison frog translocated outside the area of their routine
movements (200-800 m). Translocated frogs returned to their home territory via a 
direct path from all distances and with little difference in orientation
accuracy, suggesting a flexible map-like navigation mechanism. These findings
challenge our current understanding of both the mechanisms and the sensory basis 
of amphibian orientation.

© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jeb.169714 
PMID: 29217629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.


9. Zootaxa. 2017 Jan 16;4221(1):zootaxa.4221.1.3. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4221.1.3.

A new species of poison-dart frog (Anura: Dendrobatidae) from Manu province,
Amazon region of southeastern Peru, with notes on its natural history,
bioacoustics, phylogenetics, and recommended conservation status.

Serrano-Rojas SJ(1), Whitworth A, Villacampa J, May RV, Gutiérrez RC, Padial JM, 
Chaparro JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Crees Foundation, Mariscal Gamarra, B-5, Zona-1, 2da Etapa, Cusco, Perú.
Universidad Nacional San Antonio Abad del Cusco (UNSAAC), Av. de la Cultura, Nro.
733, Cusco - Perú.. shirley.serrano25@gmail.com.

We describe and name a new species of poison-dart frog from the Amazonian slopes 
of the Andes in Manu Province, Madre de Dios Department, Peru; specifically
within the Amarakaeri Communal Reserve and the buffer zone of Manu National Park.
Ameerega shihuemoy sp. nov. is supported by a unique combination of characters:
black dorsum with cream to light orange dorsolateral lines, blue belly
reticulated with black, and the lack of axillary, thigh and calf flash marks.
Within Ameerega, it shares the general appearance of A. altamazonica, A.
boliviana, A. hahneli, A. ignipedis, A. petersi, A. picta, A. pongoensis, A.
pulchripecta, A. simulans, A. smaragdina, and A. yungicola; each possessing a
granular black to brown dorsum, a light labial bar, a conspicuous dorsolateral
line running from the snout to the groin, and a metallic blue belly and underside
of arms and hind limbs. From most of these species it can be distinguished by
lacking flash marks on the axillae, thighs, and calves (absent in only A.
boliviana and A. smaragdina, most A. petersi, and some A. pongoensis), by having 
bright cream to orange dorsolateral stripes (white, intense yellow, or green in
all other species, with the exception of A. picta), and by its blue belly
reticulated with black (bluish white and black in A. boliviana, green and blue
with black marbling in A. petersi, and green and blue lacking black marbling in
A. smaragdina). Its mating call also shows clear differences to morphologically
similar species, with a lower note repetition rate, longer space between calls,
and higher fundamental and dominant frequencies. Phylogenetic analyses based on
the 16S mitochondrial rRNA fragment also support the distinctiveness of the new
species and suggest that A. shihuemoy is most closely related to Ameerega macero,
A. altamazonica, A. rubriventris, and two undescribed species (Ameerega sp. from 
Porto Walter, Acre, Brazil, and Ameerega sp. from Ivochote, Cusco, Peru).
Genetically, the new species is most similar to the sympatric A. macero, from
which it clearly differs in characteristics of its advertisement call and
coloration. The new species is found near rocky streams during the dry season and
near temporary water bodies during the rainy season. Tadpoles are found in lentic
water along streams, or in shallow, slow-moving streams. Given its small
geographic range, we recommend that A. shihuemoy should be considered 'Near
threatened' (NT) according to IUCN Red List criteria.

DOI: 10.11646/zootaxa.4221.1.3 
PMID: 28187674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Zootaxa. 2016 Jul 6;4136(2):387-9. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4136.2.9.

The advertisement call of Ameerega pulchripecta (Silverstone, 1976)(Anura,
Dendrobatidae).

Costa-Campos CE(1), Lima AP(2), Amézquita A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Amapá, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde,
Laboratório de Herpetologia. Macapá, AP, Brazil; Email: eduardocampos@unifap.br.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia, CEP 69060-001, Manaus, Brazil;
Email: unknown.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, AA 4976, 
Colombia; Email: unknown.

The name Ameerega picta was once used to denote a lineage of poison frogs
(Dendrobatidae) distributed throughout most of the Amazon basin (Silverstone
1976); more recently, to describe a phenetic group involving at least 18 species,
Lötters et al. (2007) pointed out that some of the lineages were indeed derived
from the former A. picta. Among them, the nominal species with the widest
distribution is A. hahneli (Haddad & Martins 1994; Twomey & Brown 2008), also an 
alleged complex of poorly defined species (Grant et al. 2006; Fouquet et al.
2007; Roberts et al. 2007). The mate-recognition signal, the advertisement call, 
was part of the evidence used to revalidate A. hahneli as a different species
from A. picta. Although the advertisement call has been described for one or few 
individuals of other species in the group (Haddad & Martins 1994; Costa et al.
2006; Twomey & Brown 2008; Lötters et al. 2009), namely A. flavopicta, A.
braccata and A. boehmei, and A. hahneli, we still lack a formal description for
A. pulchripecta, the sister taxon of A. hahneli (Twomey & Brown 2008). Its call
has been qualitatively described as similar to A. hahneli's call, but
"deeper-voiced" (Lötters et al. 2007).

DOI: 10.11646/zootaxa.4136.2.9 
PMID: 27395723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Zootaxa. 2014 Jul 18;3838(3):392-6. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.3838.3.9.

On advertisement call of the poison frog Ameerega berohoka (Dendrobatidae, Anura)
from the Brazilian Cerrado.

De Andrade FS(1), Haga IA(2), Martins FA(3), Giaretta AA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Taxonomia, Ecologia Comportamental e Sistemática de Anuros
(Lissamphibia) Neotropicais, Universidade Federal de Uberlândia, Faculdade de
Ciências Integradas do Pontal, Rua 20, nº 1600, Bairro Tupã, 38.304-402.
Ituiutaba, MG, Brazil; Email: felipe_andrade@ymail.com.
(2)Laboratório de Taxonomia, Ecologia Comportamental e Sistemática de Anuros
(Lissamphibia) Neotropicais, Universidade Federal de Uberlândia, Faculdade de
Ciências Integradas do Pontal, Rua 20, nº 1600, Bairro Tupã, 38.304-402.
Ituiutaba, MG, Brazil Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Animal, Instituto de 
Biologia, Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Rua Monteiro Lobato, 255, Cidade
Universitária, 13083-970. Campinas, SP, Brazil; Email: unknown.
(3)Laboratório de Taxonomia, Ecologia Comportamental e Sistemática de Anuros
(Lissamphibia) Neotropicais, Universidade Federal de Uberlândia, Faculdade de
Ciências Integradas do Pontal, Rua 20, nº 1600, Bairro Tupã, 38.304-402.
Ituiutaba, MG, Brazil; Email: unknown.

DOI: 10.11646/zootaxa.3838.3.9 
PMID: 25081784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Morphol. 2012 Mar;273(3):279-90. doi: 10.1002/jmor.11021. Epub 2011 Oct 24.

Skin glands, poison and mimicry in dendrobatid and leptodactylid amphibians.

Prates I(1), Antoniazzi MM, Sciani JM, Pimenta DC, Toledo LF, Haddad CF, Jared C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Celular, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.

In amphibians, secretions of toxins from specialized skin poison glands play a
central role in defense against predators. The production of toxic secretions is 
often associated with conspicuous color patterns that warn potential predators,
as it is the case of many dendrobatid frogs, including Ameerega picta. This
species resembles the presumably nontoxic Leptodactylus lineatus. This study
tests for mimicry by studying the morphology and distribution of skin glands,
components of skin secretion, and defensive behavior. Dorsal skin was studied
histologically and histochemically, and skin secretions were submitted to sodium 
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, reversed phase high
performance liquid chromatography and assays for proteolytic activity. We found
that poison glands in A. picta are filled with nonprotein granules that are rich 
in carbohydrates, while L. lineatus glands present protein granules. Accordingly,
great amounts of proteins, at least some of them enzymes, were found in the
poison of L. lineatus but not in that of A. picta. Both species differ greatly on
profiles of gland distribution: In L. lineatus, poison glands are organized in
clusters whose position coincides with colored elements of the dorsum. These
regions are evidenced through a set of displays, suggesting that poison location 
is announced to predators through skin colors. In contrast, A. picta presents
lower densities of glands, distributed homogeneously. This simpler profile
suggests a rather qualitative than quantitative investment in chemical defense,
in agreement with the high toxicity attributed to dendrobatids in general. Our
data suggest that both species are toxic or unpalatable and transmit common
warning signals to predators, which represents a case of Müllerian mimicry.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmor.11021 
PMID: 22025347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Genet. 2011 Apr;90(1):31-7.

Chromosome analysis of five Brazilian species of poison frogs (Anura:
Dendrobatidae).

Rodrigues PC(1), Aguiar O, Serpieri F, Lima AP, Uetanebaro M, Recco-Pimentel SM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomia, Biologia Celular e Fisiologia, Instituto de
Biologia, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, 13083-863 Campinas, São Paulo,
Brazil.

Dendrobatid frogs have undergone an extensive systematic reorganization based on 
recent molecular findings. The present work describes karyotypes of the Brazilian
species Adelphobates castaneoticus, A. quinquevittatus, Ameerega picta, A.
galactonotus and Dendrobates tinctorius which were compared to each other and
with previously described related species. All karyotypes consisted of 2n = 18
chromosomes, except for A. picta which had 2n = 24. The karyotypes of the
Adelphobates and D. tinctorius species were highly similar to each other and to
the other 2n = 18 previously studied species, revealing conserved karyotypic
characteristics in both genera. In recent phylogenetic studies, all Adelphobates 
species were grouped in a clade separated from the Dendrobates species. Thus, we 
hypothesized that their common karyotypic traits may have a distinct origin by
chromosome rearrangements and mutations. In A. picta, with 2n = 24, chromosome
features of pairs from 1 to 8 are shared with other previously karyotyped species
within this genus. Hence, the A. picta data reinforced that the C-banding pattern
and the NOR location are species-specific traits in the genus Ameerega. Moreover,
the Ameerega monophyletism proposed by previous phylogenetic studies indicates
that the karyotypic differences among species in this genus result from a long
divergence time.

DOI: 10.1007/s12041-011-0023-8 
PMID: 21677386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Braz J Biol. 2011 Feb;71(1):189-96.

Diet of Ameerega braccata (Steindachner, 1864) (Anura: Dendrobatidae) from
Chapada dos Guimarães and Cuiabá, Mato Grosso State, Brazil.

Forti LR(1), Tissiani AS, Mott T, Strüssmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato
Grosso, Brazil. lucas_forti@yahoo.com.br

The understanding of feeding habits is important for anurans in general, both
from an ecological and a phylogenetic perspective. For diurnal poison frogs
belonging to the Dendrobatidae family, diet aspects play a crucial role in their 
defense and survival. Herein, we investigated feeding habits, foraging behaviour,
and overall effects of habitat, sex, and body size on the diet of individuals of 
Ameerega braccata, a poorly known dendrobatid species. Specimens were observed
and collected in the type-locality, Chapada dos Guimarães, and in the
neighbouring municipality of Cuiabá, both in the State of Mato Grosso, Midwestern
Brazil. The most important prey categories for A. braccata were Formicidae,
Isoptera, and Acari, whose representatives were caught during active foraging.
Individuals from Chapada dos Guimarães population consumed more Acari but fewer
Isoptera than individuals from Cuiabá. Despite this, niche breadth values were
narrow and similar for the two populations. Individuals from two distinct
habitats (campo sujo and cerrado stricto sensu) showed differences in their diet,
probably as an effect of differential prey availability. Females consumed more
Isoptera than males. The number of prey categories used as food was not
influenced by the variation of body size of the target species. However, the
abundance and the volume of consumed Acari were statistically correlated with
body size. The main results suggest that Ameerega braccata has a narrow niche
breadth, as well as a specialised diet in ants, termites, and mites, which
reinforces the hypotheses of close association between Acari consumption and the 
presence of skin toxic alkaloids, already found in other species of
Dendrobatidae. Although differences in prey consumption between sexes are
uncommon among poisonous frogs, differences in the diet composition between age
classes, which probably reduce intraspecific competition, are frequently
reported.

DOI: 10.1590/s1519-69842011000100027 
PMID: 21437417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Braz J Biol. 2010 Feb;70(1):211-6.

Acoustic communication and vocalization microhabitat in Ameerega braccata
(Steindachner, 1864) (Anura, Dendrobatidae) from midwestern Brazil.

Forti LR(1), Strüssmann C, Mott T.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, MT,
Brazil. lucas_forti@yahoo.com.br

Ameerega braccata is an aposematic, small dendrobatid anuran known from its
type-locality, Chapada dos Guimarães, in the State of Mato Grosso, and from a few
additional localities in Mato Grosso do Sul and Goiás States, Brazil. The
advertisement call of A. braccata is composed of a single unpulsed note, with a
frequency range from 3.5 to 4.2 KHz (N = 110), and average duration of 65.8 ms (N
= 110, SD = 11.6). The territorial call is composed of five or six repeated
notes, structurally similar to advertisement call notes. The courtship call is
emitted in close-range interactions between male-female during the courtship
event and may reach frequencies of 2.2 to 5.3 KHz (N = 10), with shorter notes
(average duration 43 ms; N = 10; SD = 4.9). Call duration, note duration and call
rate of the advertisement call showed high variation (>15% of coefficient of
variation), and dominant frequency showed low variation (<4%). The properties
with higher variation possibly respond to climatic features and male social
position. When producing advertisement calls, males were usually found at an
average height of 31.4 cm (N = 19, SD = 12.2 cm), mainly on leaves of shrubs and 
herbaceous plants (59%). Individuals of A. braccata were found in open
physiognomies in the Cerrado ('campo sujo' and 'cerrado stricto sensu'), as
opposed to that found by previous researchers, who reported an association of the
species with gallery forests in the Cerrado.

DOI: 10.1590/s1519-69842010000100029 
PMID: 20231980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2009;72(15-16):974-85. doi:
10.1080/15287390902929733.

Risks to Colombian amphibian fauna from cultivation of coca (Erythroxylum coca): 
a geographical analysis.

Lynch JD(1), Arroyo SB.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogota,
Colombia. jdlynch@unal.edu.co

The Colombian amphibian fauna is among the richest known in the world, with about
20 species of salamanders (order Caudata), 35 of the limbless caecilians (order
Gymnophiona), and more than 700 species of frogs and toads (order Anura) recorded
from localities within the country. The potential effects of exposure to
glyphosate on amphibians arising from production of illegal crops (coca) were
examined. The analysis was based on (1) behavior and ecology of species and (2)
proximities of actual museum records to localities in which illegal crops are
being grown and the subset of those that have been sprayed with glyphosate. Based
on data on the location of amphibians collected in Colombia, records were
obtained for 193 species (28% of the national diversity) of frogs and toads found
in localities within 10 km of areas where coca is grown. Further analyses with
ARC MAP software allowed for measurement of the direct distance separating
collection locations for frogs, known coca fields, and areas where aerial
spraying was being conducted. Records in or near coca fields included data for 11
of 13 families of frogs and toads known to be present in Colombia. Only
Ceratophryidae and Pipidae were not reported from these locations and appear not 
to be at risk. For eight species (Dendrobates truncatus, Craugastor raniformis,
Pristimantis gaigeae, Smilisca phaeota, Elachistocleis ovale, Hypsiboas
crepitans, Trachycephalus venulosus, and Pseudis paradoxa) selected to represent 
several habitat preferences and life-cycle strategies, large areas of their
distributions lie outside coca production regions and their populations as a
whole are at low risk. For a limited number of species that barely enter
Colombian territory, the consequences of coca production may be more serious and 
may have placed several species of frogs at risk. These include Ameerega
bilingua, Dendropsophus bifurcus, Pristimantis colomai, P. degener, P.
diadematus, P. quaquaversus, P. variabilis, and Trachycephalus jordani. Other
species may also be at risk but exact numbers are unknown since few
investigations were undertaken in these areas during the past 30 yr. The main
ranges for these species were assumed to be in Ecuador.

DOI: 10.1080/15287390902929733 
PMID: 19672766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Nat Prod. 2009 Jun;72(6):1110-4. doi: 10.1021/np900094v.

N-methyldecahydroquinolines: an unexpected class of alkaloids from Amazonian
poison frogs (Dendrobatidae).

Daly JW(1), Ware N, Saporito RA, Spande TF, Garraffo HM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, DHHS, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-0820, USA.

The dominant alkaloids previously identified in skin extracts of Amazonian
dendrobatid frogs of the genus Ameerega are histrionicotoxins and
2,5-disubstituted decahydroquinolines. Analysis of alkaloids in skin extracts of 
Ameerega picta from Bolivia revealed that the alkaloid 257A, previously reported 
as a 2,5-disubstituted decahydroquinoline, is an N-methyl-2,5-disubstituted
decahydroquinoline. We characterized alkaloids of another 12 of the more than 25 
species recently assigned to the genus Ameerega, and five additional
N-methyldecahydroquinolines were identified. In some cases, the relative
configuration of the N-methyldecahydroquinolines was determined by comparison
with the N-methylated products prepared from the corresponding 2,5-disubstituted 
decahydroquinolines of known relative configuration. A dietary source for
N-methyldecahydroquinolines is unknown; however, myrmicine ants are the likely
source for the 2,5-disubstituted decahydroquinolines. The alkaloids in skin
extracts of three species of another genus of Amazonian poison frog,
Adelphobates, were also characterized, but N-methyldecahydroquinolines were not
detected.

DOI: 10.1021/np900094v 
PMCID: PMC3290094
PMID: 19432407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochem Pharmacol. 1975 Sep 15;24(18):1739-42.

Effects of 5,6-dihydroxytryptamine on tyrosine-hydroxylase activity in central
catecholaminergic neurons of the rat.

Renaud B, Buda M, Lewis BD, Pujol JF.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(75)90018-0 
PMID: 17  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochem Pharmacol. 1975 Sep 15;24(18):1739-42.

Effects of 5,6-dihydroxytryptamine on tyrosine-hydroxylase activity in central
catecholaminergic neurons of the rat.

Renaud B, Buda M, Lewis BD, Pujol JF.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(75)90018-0 
PMID: 17  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Eksp Khir Anesteziol. 1966 Nov-Dec;11(6):13-6.

[An experimental study of the reversibility of sclerotic changes in the
pancreas].

[Article in Russian]

Blagovidov DF, Pomel'tsov AN, Sarkisov DS, Fink AS, Andrushchenko ES.


PMID: 6000006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biochemistry. 1975 Dec 2;14(24):5308-11.

Circular dichroism and fluorescence studies of homogeneous antibodies to type III
pneumococcal polysaccharide.

Jaton JC, Huser H, Blatt Y, Pecht I.

The near-ultraviolet circular dichroism (CD) of three homogeneous anti-type III
pneumococcal antibodies in the absence and the presence of the specific
hexasaccharide ligand was studied. In addition recombinations and hybridizations 
of H and L chains derived from two of these antibodies were carried out and the
CD spectra of bound and free reconstituted IgG molecules were measured. The
results indicate that the CD spectra of the native antibodies in the 260-310-nm
range are very similar in shape and sign and exhibit a positive band at 285 nm.
The homologous reconstituted antibody molecules exhibited CD spectra very similar
in shape and sign to those of the native antibody molecules although recombinant 
molecules are no longer stabilized by interchain disulfide bonds. Upon addition
of the hexasaccharide ligand, a significant decrease in amplitude of the CD
spectra (18-21%) occurred in all three native antibodies and their Fab fragments 
as well as in the homologous recombinant molecules. No CD spectral changes could 
be detected upon interaction of the hapten ligand with the heterologous
recombinants. All homogeneous antibodies studied exhibited fluorescence quenching
upon oligosaccharide binding and a blue shift of the emission maximum. This
property allowed the determination of the binding constant of one selected
antibody to be made. Taken together, CD and fluorescence spectroscopic data
suggest that oligosaccharide ligands induced detectable conformational changes in
the Fab fragment of the antibody.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00695a013 
PMID: 50  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


